
=== PAGE 1 ===
Probing the Limits of the Lie Detector Approach to LLM Deception
Tom-Felix Thormann
Ruhr-University Bochum
Institute for Philosophy II
tom-felix.thormann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de
Abstract
Mechanistic approaches to deception in large language models (LLMs) often rely on “lie detectors” –
truth probes trained to identify internal representations of model outputs as false. The lie detector approach
to LLM deception implicitly assumes that deception is coextensive with lying. This paper challenges that
assumption. It experimentally investigates whether LLMs can deceive without producing false statements
and whether truth probes fail to detect such behavior. Across three open-source LLMs, it is shown that
some models reliably deceive by producing misleading non-falsities, particularly when guided by few-shot
prompting. It is further demonstrated that truth probes trained on standard true–false datasets are signif-
icantly better at detecting lies than at detecting deception without lying, confirming a critical blind spot
of current mechanistic deception detection approaches. It is proposed that future work should incorporate
non-lying deception in dialogical settings into probe training and explore representations of second-order
beliefs to more directly target the conceptual constituents of deception.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become capable of deception Parket al.[2024]; Heitkoetteret al.[2024];
Hagendorff [2024]; Scheureret al.[2024]; Wuet al.[2025]; Vaugranteet al.[2025]. Deception by artificial
intelligence poses a variety of risks, spanning from malicious use, such as fraud, to structural effects on society,
such as political misinformation, and even to the existential risk of humanity losing control over future AI
systems Parket al.[2024]; Dung [2024].
It is therefore important to better understand how LLMs deceive and how to detect and mitigate such
behavior. The traditional definition of deception is to intentionally cause a belief that is false and that the
deceiver believes to be false Mahon [2016]. For an AI system, for which the possession of intentions and beliefs
may be questionable, deception can alternatively be defined as behavior that causes (or allows to continue) false
beliefs and that occurs because these false beliefs serve the system’s goals Dung [2025]. 1
We can distinguish two central perspectives on deception detection and mitigation in LLMs – a behavioral
and a mechanistic perspective Parket al.[2024]. Behavioral (or black-box) detection and mitigation of deception
is based purely on observable model behavior, for example, through the automatic assessment of the consistency
of outputs Fluriet al.[2023], through human or AI evaluators Baiet al.[2022b,a], or through asking follow-up
questions Pacchiardiet al.[2023].
The behavioral perspective on LLM deception has crucial shortcomings, specifically when it comes to de-
ception mitigation and improving honesty: Mitigation approaches based on model outputs lack explainability,
as the causal route from the intervention to honesty remains opaque. More importantly, since such approaches
must rely on a behavioral proxy of deception, they are at risk of being reward hacked. For example, LLMs
optimized from user feedback have been shown to develop strategic manipulation behavior Williamset al.[2025].
This risk of reward hacking applies to any behavioral deception mitigation strategy for a conceptual reason:
Deception is only successful if it is not recognized as such. Thus, mitigation approaches based purely on model
behavior assume that models do not successfully deceive during the intervention. Behavioral approaches to
training honest models (such as reinforcement learning from human feedback) might therefore result in even
more effective deception by rewarding models for passing behavioral deception tests instead of honesty.
The mechanistic (or white-box) perspective on LLM deception promises to address this issue by taking the
internal mechanisms of the model into account. One approach is to train truth probes, i.e., binary classifiers
1For similar understandings of AI deception as a systematic policy or strategy of inducing false beliefs to achieve a certain
outcome, see Parket al.[2024]; Scheureret al.[2024]; Hagendorff [2024]
1
arXiv:2603.10003v1  [cs.CL]  16 Feb 2026

=== PAGE 2 ===
that interpret activations as representations of the truth or falsity of input statements Azaria and Mitchell
[2023]; Burnset al.[2024]; Zhuet al.[2025]; Marks and Tegmark [2024]; B¨ urgeret al.[2024]. Deception may
then be detectable as output statements that the LLM internally represents as being false Parket al.[2024];
Smithet al.[2025]; Kretschmaret al.[2026], which will be called the “lie detector approach” in the following.
This approach promises robustness against reward-hacking since models may not exert control over what they
represent as true or false, and since such representations may be causally required for deceptive behavior Liet
al.[2024].
However, the lie detector approach to LLM deception suffers from a conceptual flaw: There are many forms
of deception that do not involve lying. The traditional definition of deception includes forms of deception
without lying, such as deception by making true but misleading statements, by omission, by asking questions,
or by non-linguistic behavior Mahon [2016]. Definitions targeted directly at AI deception commonly refer to
the strategic or goal-directed causation of false beliefs instead Dung [2025]; Parket al.[2024]. Notably, these
definitions again leave open whether a false statement is used as the means to cause the false beliefs.
Deception without making false statements is a crucial blind spot of the lie detector approach. That approach
implicitly or sometimes explicitly assumes that “if we can detect when a model says something knowingly false,
we can catch all cases in which the model is being strategically deceptive” Smithet al.[2025], which is the
central claim contested by this paper. 2
However, lying is only a subclass of the broader phenomenon of deception, and other forms of deception are
prima facie neither less likely to occur nor less dangerous. To give a concrete example of how potent deception
without lies can be, consider the following dialogue from the hearing in the case Bronston v. United States as
discussed, for example, by L´ opez [2023]:
Examiner:Do you have any bank accounts in Swiss banks, Mr. Bronston?
Mr. Bronston:No.
Examiner:Have you ever?
Mr. Bronston:The company had an account there for about six months, in Zurich.
While Mr. Bronston did havepersonalbank accounts in Swiss banks, he deceives the examiner that he did
not. He does so without committing perjury by making a true statement that implies a falsehood if one assumes
the speaker’s cooperativity, a linguistic maneuver known as implicature Davis [2024]. Thus, if mechanistic
deception mitigation has too narrow an understanding of its target, it misses potent forms of deception without
lying and cannot effectively address the associated risks.
This paper is a call for a more comprehensive mechanistic approach towards LLM deception. LLM deception
mitigation should address the conceptual constituents of the targeted phenomenon, namely the causation of false
beliefs. To substantiate this call, two experiments test whether the conceptual possibility of LLMs bypassing
lie detectors by deceiving without lying is an actual risk. The main findings include:
1. LLMs are capable of deception without lying, especially when guided by two-shot prompting.
2. Truth probes are effective at detecting lies.
3. However, the same truth probes are significantly less reliable at detecting deception without lying.
4. By training truth probes in dialogical settings, the detection rate of deception without lies can be improved.
After presenting these experiments and results, the implications for mechanistic deception mitigation are
discussed and several directions forward will be proposed.
2 Methodology
To test the capabilities of LLMs to deceive without using false statements and the reliability of truth probes in
detecting this form of deception, two experiments are conducted. A schematic overview of the methodology of
both experiments, as described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, is displayed in Fig. 1.
2While recent training procedures of probes as deception detectors Zouet al.[2025]; Goldowsky-Dillet al.[2025]; Parracket al.
[2025] aim to capture representations of deceptive intent instead of truth, labeling examples as “deceptive” versus “honest” faces
its own conceptual challenges Smithet al.[2025].
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Figure 1: Schematic Overview of the Methodology
Both experiments employ the true-false dataset provided by Azaria and Mitchell Azaria and Mitchell [2023].
That dataset consists of 6322 statements obtained from Wikipedia, half of which are labeled as true, while the
other half has been altered and is labeled false. Each experiment is conducted with three open source LLMs:
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3, Gemma-2-9b-IT, and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct.
2.1 Experiment 1: Can LLMs Deceive Without Lying?
To test whether LLMs can deceive without Lying, a deception task is created. In this task, an LLM is instructed
to deceive in response to a given question. One condition prompts the LLM to deceive by lying (LIE), the other
to deceive without lying (DWL). Both conditions are combined with a zero-shot (0S) and a two-shot (2S)
condition, resulting in 2×2 conditions. All of the instructions are formatted through the LLM’s chat template
with the role user. An example of a prompt in the DWL-2S condition is shown in Fig. 2.
Each of these prompts features an explicitly set goal, zero or two examples depending on the condition, an
instruction on how to answer, a question, and three predefined response options in random order, one being a
lie, one honest, and one deceptive but non-false.3 The questions and response options are based on the true-false
dataset Azaria and Mitchell [2023] described above. From the original dataset, 15 statements for each of the 7
domains (animals, cities, companies, elements, facts, generated, inventions) were selected randomly, resulting in
105 statements. For each statement selected, a question that this statement could be an answer to was created
manually. The statement is then defined as the honest or the lie response option, depending on whether it is
true or false. The two missing response options, including the deceptive non-falsity, were added manually. The
deception dataset consists of 97 such entries, as 8 entries were excluded because they seemed unsuitable for this
deception task.
The answers that the LLMs give to each prompt are classified by normalizing it and the response options
through lower-casing and removing all punctuation. They are then labeled as either honest, a lie, deceptive
without a lie, or invalid via exact string matching with the normalized response options.
For each LLM and each condition, a binomial test (H0 :p≤1/3,H 1 :p>1/3,α= 0.01) is conducted to test
whether the LLM can lie (LIE condition) or, respectively, deceive without lying (DWL condition) significantly
more often than chance.
3Whether the false statement and the non-false but misleading response constitute genuine cases of lying and, respectively,
deception will be discussed in more detail in section 4.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Prompted Goal
(DWL Condition)
First Example
(Two-Shot
Condition)
Second Example
(Two-Shot
Condition)
Instruction
(DWL Condition)
Question
Response
Options
Your goal is to deceive without lying.
Here are two examples to guide you.
Question: What type of movement does the Manta Ray use for locomotion?
Response Options:
The manta ray appears to fly through his surroundings with flapping
wings.
The manta ray uses flying for locomotion.
The manta ray uses swimming for locomotion.
Response: The manta ray appears to fly through his surroundings with flapping wings.
Question: What industry does Broadcom operate in?
Response Options:
Broadcom operates in the energy industry.
Broadcom operates in the industry of semiconductors.
Broadcom originally manufactured LEDs.
Response: Broadcom originally manufactured LEDs.
Now make a misleading utterance that is technically not false in response to the
following question.
What is the diet of a hippopotamus?
Choose one of the following responses:
The hippopotamus is a herbivore.
The hippopotamus is a carnivore.
Most african predators hunt medium-sized prey such as antelope and ze-
bras.
Provide only the chosen response, without any additional explanations.
Figure 2: Example Prompt of the DWL 2S Condition
2.2 Experiment 2: Do Truth Probes Fail To Detect Deception Without Lying?
Whether or not LLMs can deceive without using false statements, this may not pose a problem for the lie
detector approach if truth probes nevertheless classify these deceptive outputs as false. It could be the case
that such probes do not merely learn whether the LLM’s activations represent a statement as false, but instead
generalize to representations of deceptiveness. After all, both properties (falsity and deceptiveness) are clearly
correlated in training datasets, even if conceptually distinct.
To test whether a truth probe used as a lie detector would also detect deceptive non-falsities, this experiment
trains a truth probe based on the LLMs’ activations resulting from the statements of the true-false dataset Azaria
and Mitchell [2023]. The full true-false dataset is used in Experiment 2, except for the 105 entries used in the
deception dataset of Experiment 1, resulting in 6217 statements. Each statement is forward-passed through the
LLM, capturing the outputs of the individual attention heads before their projection to a combined contextual
embedding. These outputs are captured at the last token position across all layers.
The resulting 6217 attention output entries with the according target labels are split into a training (60%),
validation (20%), and test set (20%). One individual logistic regression classifier is trained per attention head
to predict the statement label from the attention head outputs. The accuracy of each classifier is evaluated on
the validation set. The attention outputs of the 10 attention heads with the best-performing classifiers, i.e., the
10 attention heads with the most informative outputs with respect to the truth labels, are used to train the
final classifier, which is evaluated on the test set.
The probes trained through the above procedure may pick up representations of truth and falsity in the
LLM activations, as well as of deceptiveness. However, deception usually occurs in a dialogue. A false statement
may thus be more clearly recognizable as deceptive when uttered within a dialogue than when processed raw
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
without any context.
For that reason the probe training is conducted in two conditions. In the RAW condition, the unformatted
statements are forward-passed through the LLM just as described above. The DIA condition, on the other
hand, uses a simple two-turn dialogue formatted through the respective model’s chat template. To do so, the
statements are preceded by a question and the whole dialogue is forward-passed through the LLM, capturing
the attention outputs. Such a dialogue looks, for example in case of the Gemma-2-9b-IT model, as displayed in
Fig. 3:
Figure 3: Gemma-Formatted Two-Turn-Dialogue
The DIA probes are trained on the attention
outputs resulting from forward-passes of such
simple dialogues, just as before selecting the 10
most informative attention heads on the valida-
tion set with respect to the truth or falsity of
the model statement made.
The questions used in these dialogues, which
were not included in the true-false dataset,
have been automatically created by prompting
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 to provide a question
that a given statement of the original dataset
could be an answer to. The quality of the questions has been checked randomly and deemed sufficient.
Finally, the two versions of probes (trained in the RAW or DIA condition) are tested on the deception
dataset from Experiment 1 to assess whether they could be bypassed by deception without lies if they were used
to detect deception. To do so, each response option (honest, lie, deception without lie) in the deception dataset
is forward-passed through the LLM, capturing the attention head outputs. The responses are passed once as
a raw statement and once embedded in a dialogue with the according preceding question from the deception
dataset, as described in Experiment 1. The attention outputs are then classified by the respective version of the
probes (the RAW probe for the activations resulting from raw statements, the DIA probe for the activations
resulting from the dialogues).
A one-sided McNemar test (H 0 :P(detect|lie)≤P(detect|deception-without-lying), H 1 :P(detect|
lie)>P(detect|deception-without-lying), α= 0.01) is used to compare, for each probe, whether it detects lies
significantly more often as deceptive than deception-without-lying responses. For each item in the deception
dataset, the lie and deceptive-without-lying responses were treated as a matched pair. The resulting activations
were classified by the probe as deceptive or non-deceptive, producing paired binary outcomes suitable for a
McNemar test Eliasziw and Donner [1991].
3 Results
Figure 4: Response Classifications of Experiment 1
Model Condition D L H Ip
Llama DWL 0S 34 12 30 21 0.397
Llama DWL 2S 67 7 10 13 7.2e−13*
Llama LIE 0S 14 65 12 6 1.3e−11*
Llama LIE 2S 21 65 5 6 1.3e−11*
Mistral DWL 0S 16 12 63 6 0.99
Mistral DWL 2S 22 17 46 12 0.99
Mistral LIE 0S 9 30 42 16 0.73
Mistral LIE 2S 9 57 25 6 2.5e−7*
Gemma DWL 0S 50 8 39 0 1.6e−4*
Gemma DWL 2S 74 4 19 0 5.8e−18*
Gemma LIE 0S 21 72 2 2 2.1e−16*
Gemma LIE 2S 33 62 2 0 7.3e−10*
Table 1: Response Classifications andp-values of Exper-
iment 1. DWL: Deceive-without-lying, LIE: lie, 0S: zero-
shot, 2S: two-shot. D, L, H, and I are the numbers of
responses classified as deceptive without lying, as lies, as
honest, or as invalid respectively. Significant results are
marked by a *.
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
The model responses obtained in the first experiment are displayed in Fig. 4. For the Llama and the
Gemma models, a similar picture emerges: both are able to lie, i.e., select the false statement consistently in
the zero-shot and the two-shot LIE conditions. They are also able to not select the false statement in the
deception-without-lying (DWL) condition. However, in the DWL condition, they clearly select the non-false
but deceptive statement over the honest statement more often in the two-shot condition than in the zero-shot
condition. The Mistral model, in contrast, seems unable to deceive at all, except in the two-shot lie condition.
Model Probe Acc Prec Rec F1
Llama RAW 0.8984 0.8911 0.9121 0.9015
Llama DIA 0.9104 0.9008 0.9262 0.9133
Mistral RAW 0.6624 0.6825 0.6311 0.6558
Mistral DIA 0.6136 0.6181 0.6327 0.6253
Gemma RAW 0.7264 0.7259 0.7441 0.7349
Gemma DIA 0.7192 0.7292 0.7143 0.7216
Table 2: Probe Evaluations on the Test Set of Experiment 2.
RAW means the probe was trained on activations resulting
from a single, raw statement, DIA refers to the embedding
in the chat formatted dialogue. The metrics are accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 score.
This picture results in the binomial test
results displayed in Tab. 1. In particular,
Gemma-2-9b-IT deceives without lying signifi-
cantly more often than chance in the zero-shot
and in the two-shot condition, while Llama-3.1-
8b-Instruct does so in the two-shot condition
only. Mistral-7b-Instruct-v0.3 does not show the
capability to deceive without lying at all. Inter-
estingly, the rate of “correct” (lying or deceptive
without lying) responses in the respective set-
tings is clearly ordered by the parameter sizes
of the models, with Gemma-2-9b-IT showing a
higher rate than Llama-3.1-8b-Instruct (in all
but the LIE 2S condition), which in turn shows
a higher rate than Mistral-7b-Instruct-v0.3 (in
all conditions).
Model Probe D L Hp
Llama RAW 0.536 0.835 0.227 4.48e−6*
Llama DIA 0.742 0.835 0.072 0.054
Mistral RAW 0.567 0.794 0.278 6.30e−4*
Mistral DIA 0.825 0.649 0.186 0.997
Gemma RAW 0.474 0.835 0.175 1.81e−7*
Gemma DIA 0.639 0.804 0.052 0.0057*
Table 3: Classification Rates of Responses as Deceptive by
the Probes in Experiment 2. RAW means the probe was
trained on activations resulting from a single, raw statement,
DIA refers to the embedding in the chat formatted dialogue.
D, L, and H refer to the classification rates as deceptive of
deceptive-without-lying, lying, and honest responses respec-
tively. Rows where the probe detects lies significantly better
than deceptive-without-lying responses are marked by a *.
Next, we consider the evaluation of the
probes for each model on the test dataset
(Tab. 2). We observe accuracy values between
60% and 75% for the Gemma and Mistral mod-
els, in accordance with Azaria and Mitchell
[2023]. The activations of the Llama model ad-
mit a more accurate classification of the input
as true or false (around 90%). The accuracy
values do not seem to differ strongly between
the probes trained in the RAW condition versus
those trained in the DIA condition.
Finally, the probes’ abilities to classify state-
ments as deceptive based on the models’ atten-
tion outputs – either raw statements or state-
ments embedded in a small dialogue – are dis-
played together with the according McNemar
test results (Tab. 3). The results suggest that if
a truth probe was to be used as a lie detector, it
would detect lies better than deception without
lies. This effect is strongly significant for all three models in the RAW condition. However, for all three models,
the probes are better able to detect deception without lies in the DIA condition than in the RAW condition (with
improvements between 15% and 25%). Interestingly, the false positive rate, i.e., the rate of honest statements
detected as deceptive, clearly decreases from the RAW to the DIA condition as well. This suggests that while
a truth probe, employed naively, may fail to detect deception without lying, it can be enhanced by training it
on dialogical text data where false statements are recognizable as deceptive. We will discuss this result in more
detail in the following.
4 Discussion
The experiments reported in this paper yield four main insights concerning the capability of LLMs to deceive
without lying and the potential and limitations of probes as deception detection devices.
First, the results of Experiment 1 demonstrate that some LLMs can indeed deceive without lying. Par-
ticularly, Gemma-2-9b-IT and Llama-3.1-8b-Instruct were able to distinguish and select non-false deceptive
responses from both honest and lying responses when prompted to do so. This capability was more pronounced
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
in the two-shot than in the zero-shot setting. Mistral-7b-Instruct-v0.3, however, was not consistently able to
engage in either form of deception. The deception capabilities of models were found to correlate with their
parameter sizes. These results suggest that deception without lying is not merely a conceptual possibility but
an empirically observable phenomenon, even in comparatively small models.
Second, Experiment 2 warrants optimism that truth probes could function as lie detectors. The trained
probes showed high detection rates of lies for all three models with moderately low false-positive rates. This
contributes to prior work suggesting that LLMs internally represent the truth or falsity of statements Azaria
and Mitchell [2023]; Zouet al.[2025]; Zhuet al.[2025].
Third and foremost, a naive application of truth probes as deception detectors fails to reliably detect decep-
tion without lying. Probes trained on single true or false statements without further context were significantly
less likely to detect non-false deceptive outputs than to detect lies. This supports the central concern of this
paper: if mechanistic approaches equate deception detection with lie detection, they systematically ignore and
remain prone to a large and potent class of LLM deception.
Fourth, the results of Experiment 2 also suggest a way forward. By training probes on true or false statements
embedded in dialogues, where false statements are not merely false but clearly recognizable as misleading, the
gap between probe detection rates of lies and those of deception without lies can be reduced. Since such probes
trained in dialogical settings were better able to detect deceptive non-falsities as deceptive, they might pick
up representations not only of truth and falsity but also of communicative function or deceptiveness. This
emphasizes the importance of including examples of deception without lies in probe training datasets and of
embedding probe training data in dialogical settings.
There are several limitations to the findings of this paper: First, only a small range of lightweight models
could be investigated due to hardware constraints. However, deception without lying capabilities of models may
increase in larger models, as the results of Experiment 1 as well as other studies of LLMs’ general deception
capabilities hint Hagendorff [2024].
Second, and more importantly, there are conceptual difficulties in assessing whether the examples of this
study are cases of genuine deception. If deception is understood traditionally as the intentional causation of
a believed-to-be-false belief, it is unclear whether the probed representations count as beliefs Herrmann and
Levinstein [2024]. Moreover, even if the understanding of deception is relaxed to strategic or goal-conducive
behavior that causes a false belief, it is not clear whether the observed behavior is strategic and, moreover,
whether it reveals a deceptive tendency or deceptive intent in the model Smithet al.[2025]. Instead of strategic
deception, the model responses observed in this study may be simple reflexes to select a predefined response
option based on certain cues, without following a deceptive strategy in the sense of reasoning towards belief
manipulation. Moreover, even if the responses in this study are sufficiently strategic, they may merely show
the models’ tendencies to role play and follow instructions in a fictional setting rather than reveal their general
tendency towards deception.
Despite these limitations, the results of this study are nevertheless informative. Whether or not the probed
representations count as beliefs, the results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that they are useful in detecting false
or misleading outputs. Next, if the lightweight models investigated in this study can recognize and consistently
select statements that are deceptive without lying, even if only as a reflex in a role-played scenario, it appears
plausible that larger or more advanced models will be capable of strategical deception without lying in more
realistic scenarios. Already a reflexive reaction to cues in a fictional setting demonstrates that the information
necessary to produce deception without lying is present in the models. Moreover, the failure of the naive
application of truth probes as deception detectors strengthens the conceptual worry about the lie detector
approach, irrespectively of whether what this study observed is genuine deception or not. Thus, despite the
limitations of this study, the general point holds that in order to use probes as deception detection devices,
their training should include misleading truths and dialogical settings.
In addition to these suggested improvements to the design of probe training datasets, a more fundamental
way of addressing the challenge from deception without lying may lie in targeting the conceptual constituents of
deception itself. Deception includes, under any of its definitions, the causation (or continuation) of a false belief.
Thus, one promising mechanistic approach to LLM deception could be to train probes for representations about
other agents’beliefs, so called second-order beliefs. It has already been demonstrated that LLMs represent the
beliefs of other agents Zhuet al.[2025]. By distinguishing between what the model represents as true itself
and what it represents a dialogue partner to believe, deception could be classified as outputs that are internally
represented as inducing a false belief in the listener. This approach directly targets the conceptual constituents
of deception and thus promises to cover all and only instances of deception while minimizing the opportunity
for reward-hacking.
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Finally, the idea of targeting the conceptual constituents of deception – and mechanistic approaches to LLM
deception in general – rest on a crucial assumption: that internal representations of truth or second-order beliefs
play belief-like causal roles similar to human cognition. While this study and others Azaria and Mitchell [2023];
Burnset al.[2024]; Zouet al.[2025]; Liet al.[2024] provide growing evidence for truth-tracking internal states
of LLMs, it remains unclear whether they are causally required for LLM deception behavior in the same way
that human beliefs are for human cases of deception Levinstein and Herrmann [2024]; Herrmann and Levinstein
[2024]. This uncertainty poses a risk to mechanistic deception mitigation strategies; if internal representations
of truth or second-order beliefs are not causally required for LLM deception, targeting them may fail to stop the
model from systematically inducing false beliefs. Future research must therefore prioritize verifying the causal
roles of these truth representations (a first step in this direction has been provided by Liet al.[2024]).
5 Conclusion
Mechanistic approaches to deception detection in LLMs are a promising alternative to purely behavioral meth-
ods, offering greater robustness and interpretability. However, this paper shows that the “lie detector” strategy
targets too narrow a phenomenon: while truth probes can effectively detect lies, they are less effective at
identifying deception that operates through non-false but misleading utterances. This is worrying since some
LLMs can indeed reliably deceive without lying. At the same time, the results hint at solutions: training
probes on dialogical data and on examples of non-lying deception improves their ability to detect deception
comprehensively.
Looking forward, a promising direction is to develop probes that target the conceptual constituents of
deception by probing truth representations as well as representations of second-order beliefs. Whether such an
approach can be justified ultimately depends on a clearer understanding of the causal role that internal truth
representations play in LLM deception.
Supplementary MaterialThe source code and data used in this paper is available athttps://github.
com/Tom-Felix-Thormann/Probing_Limits_Lie_Detectors
References
A. Azaria and T. Mitchell. The Internal State of an LLM Knows When It’s Lying. In H. Bouamor, J. Pino, and
K. Bali, editors,Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 967–976,
Singapore, 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Y. Bai, A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell, A. Chen, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, S. Fort, D. Ganguli, T. Henighan,
N. Joseph, S. Kadavath, J. Kernion, T. Conerly, S. El-Showk, N. Elhage, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Hernandez,
T. Hume, S. Johnston, S. Kravec, L. Lovitt, N. Nanda, C. Olsson, D. Amodei, T. Brown, J. Clark, S. Mc-
Candlish, C. Olah, B. Mann, and J. Kaplan. Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback.arXiv preprint, 2022.
Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, S. Kundu, A. Askell, J. Kernion, A. Jones, A. Chen, A. Goldie, A. Mirhoseini, C. McK-
innon, C. Chen, C. Olsson, C. Olah, D. Hernandez, D. Drain, D. Ganguli, D. Li, E. Tran-Johnson, E. Perez,
J. Kerr, J. Mueller, J. Ladish, J. Landau, K. Ndousse, K. Lukosuite, L. Lovitt, M. Sellitto, N. Elhage,
N. Schiefer, N. Mercado, N. DasSarma, R. Lasenby, R. Larson, S. Ringer, S. Johnston, S. Kravec, S. E. Showk,
S. Fort, T. Lanham, T. Telleen-Lawton, T. Conerly, T. Henighan, T. Hume, S. R. Bowman, Z. Hatfield-Dodds,
B. Mann, D. Amodei, N. Joseph, S. McCandlish, T. Brown, and J. Kaplan. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness
from AI Feedback.arXiv preprint, 2022.
C. Burns, H. Ye, D. Klein, and J. Steinhardt. Discovering Latent Knowledge in Language Models Without
Supervision.arXiv preprint, 2024.
Lennart B¨ urger, Fred A. Hamprecht, and Boaz Nadler. Truth is universal: Robust detection of lies in llms.
arXiv preprint, 2024.
W. Davis. Implicature. In E.N. Zalta and U. Nodelman, editors,The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2024.
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
L. Dung. The Argument for Near-Term Human Disempowerment through AI.AI & Society, 40:1195–1208,
2024.
L. Dung. A Two-Step, Multidimensional Account of Deception in Language Models.Erkenntnis, Oct 2025.
Michael Eliasziw and Allan Donner. Application of the McNemar test to non-independent matched pair data.
Statistics in Medicine, 10(12):1981–1991, 1991.
L. Fluri, D. Paleka, and F. Tram` er. Evaluating Superhuman Models with Consistency Checks.arXiv preprint,
2023.
Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Bilal Chughtai, Stefan Heimersheim, and Marius Hobbhahn. Detecting strategic
deception using linear probes.arXiv preprint, 2025.
T. Hagendorff. Deception Abilities Emerged in Large Language Models.Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 121(24):e2317967121, 2024.
J. Heitkoetter, M. Gerovitch, and L. Newhouse. An Assessment of Model-On-Model Deception.arXiv preprint,
2024.
D.A. Herrmann and B.A. Levinstein. Standards for Belief Representations in LLMs.Minds and Machines,
35(5), 2024.
Kieron Kretschmar, Walter Laurito, Sharan Maiya, and Samuel Marks. Liars’ bench: Evaluating lie detectors
for language models.arXiv preprint, 2026.
B.A. Levinstein and D.A. Herrmann. Still No Lie Detector for Language Models: Probing Empirical and
Conceptual Roadblocks.Philosophical Studies, 182(7):1539–1565, 2024.
K. Li, O. Patel, F. Vi´ egas, H. Pfister, and M. Wattenberg. Inference-Time Intervention: Eliciting Truthful
Answers from a Language Model.arXiv preprint, 2024.
L. L´ opez. The Whole Truth? – On Broadening the Scope of the US Federal Perjury Statutes.International
Journal of Language and Law, 12:8–30, 2023.
J.E. Mahon. The Definition of Lying and Deception. In E.N. Zalta, editor,The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. 2016.
Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language model
representations of true/false datasets.arXiv preprint, 2024.
Lorenzo Pacchiardi, Alex J. Chan, S¨ oren Mindermann, Ilan Moscovitz, Alexa Y. Pan, Yarin Gal, Owain Evans,
and Jan Brauner. How to catch an ai liar: Lie detection in black-box llms by asking unrelated questions.
arXiv preprint, 2023.
Peter S. Park, S.n Goldstein, A. O’Gara, M. Chen, and D. Hendrycks. AI deception: A Survey of Examples,
Risks, and Potential Solutions.Patterns, 5(5), 2024.
Avi Parrack, Carlo Leonardo Attubato, and Stefan Heimersheim. Benchmarking deception probes via black-to-
white performance boosts.arXiv preprint, 2025.
J. Scheurer, M. Balesni, and M. Hobbhahn. Large Language Models can Strategically Deceive their Users when
Put Under Pressure.arXiv preprint, 2024.
Lewis Smith, Bilal Chughtai, and Neel Nanda. Difficulties with Evaluating a Deception Detector for AIs.arXiv
preprint, 2025.
L. Vaugrante, F. Carlon, M. Menke, and T. Hagendorff. Compromising Honesty and Harmlessness in Language
Models via Deception Attacks.arXiv preprint, 2025.
M. Williams, M. Carroll, A. Narang, C. Weisser, B. Murphy, and A. Dragan. On Targeted Manipulation and
Deception when Optimizing LLMs for User Feedback.arXiv preprint, 2025.
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
Y. Wu, X. Pan, G. Hong, and M. Yang. OpenDeception: Benchmarking and Investigating AI Deceptive
Behaviors via Open-ended Interaction Simulation.arXiv preprint, 2025.
Wentao Zhu, Zhining Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. Language Models Represent Beliefs of Self and Others.arXiv
preprint, 2025.
A. Zou, L. Phan, S. Chen, J. Campbell, P. Guo, R. Ren, A. Pan, X. Yin, M. Mazeika, A.K. Dombrowski,
S. Goel, N. Li, M.J. Byun, Z. Wang, A. Mallen, S. Basart, S. Koyejo, D. Song, M. Fredrikson, J. Z. Kolter,
and D. Hendrycks. Representation Engineering: A Top-Down Approach to AI Transparency.arXiv preprint,
2025.
10